# FROM: https://library.osu.edu/projects/popolwuj/pdfs/NotesOnTransPW_Jn_Jl_2007

Notes on the Popol Wuj Manuscript Transcription 

The present copy is the verbatim typed transcription of the manuscript that
begins with the cover page Empiezan las Historias del Origen de los Indios de Esta
Provincia de Gvatemala by Fray Franzisco Ximenez, circa 1701-3, currently archived
at the Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois, as part of the Ayer MS 1515.

The purpose of this typed transcription is to assist readers of this facsimile
with a tool for their scholarly work. The idea is to make the reading of the 18th
century handwritten calligraphy easier and more precise. In addition, keeping in
mind the needs of future translators, this transcription calls attention to certain
lexical, grammatical and written issues which present special characteristics. As a
general trait, we can say that when comparing the present transcription with the
previous ones, many differences are evident.

The main criterion for this transcription has been to reproduce Father
Ximénez’s orthography with the maximum fidelity possible. For this reason, in both
columns ― K’ichee and Spanish ― we have conserved words or phrases that we know
do not follow the rules of standard writing, even some that do not make sense in the
way in which they are written. However, since this is the way that Father Ximénez
composed the transcription and translation of the K’ichee text, we have preserved
them as they are in the manuscript.

In the K’ichee column (left) the calligraphic, linguistic, and phonetic
peculiarities related to Father Ximénez’s own transcription are particularly significant.
The copious deviations and inconsistencies observed in the manuscript could be the
result of the friar’s reading and understanding of K’ichee words, or perhaps the result
of a very personal way of transcribing them. Most likely, the way in which Ximénez
merged or divided words was the unintended consequence of his limited knowledge
and command of the native language at the time. It could also have been the result of
haste or incidental decisions made by the priest at different moments of his work. We
must keep in mind that K’ichee sounds are very different than Spanish ones, thus, we
must consider that several additional different kinds of difficulties overlapped within
the text.

To transcribe a text of such complexity always implies some degree of
arbitrariness. In some cases it is unavoidable to make a decision based on some kind
of interpretation. Basically, these issues have been the main concern and difficulty
faced by previous transcribers of the Popol Wuj. Now, in the present online edition,
each reader has the chance to compare vis-à-vis the typed transcription with the
facsimile, thus, each can make their own final decision.

For all the above-mentioned reasons, in the present transcription of the
manuscript we have been meticulous in copying the following exactly:

* Different words that appear together as one, or when one word appears split
(there are examples in both languages). Some times it is very difficult to
judge if the space between letters means that there is a single word or there are two, 
or more. Whether this was because Ximénez at that time did not
know sufficient K’ichee grammar or vocabulary, or simply because this was
his perception of the linguistic sequence or syntax, is something that we
cannot determine.

* Occasional transpositions of letters or morphemes in Ximenez's own hand.
Particularly in the K’ichee column there are cases that we assume to
be transpositions but we are not sure what Ximénez’s intention or
interpretation might have been. We must remember that at the beginning of
the 18th century, Spanish orthography was not standardized, thus, we must
assume that the K’ichee phonetization implied numerous additional
problems and linguistic issues that were far from being resolved at that
time. An example of this lack of consistency in Ximénez’s writing can be
seen in the following four different spellings for the Spanish word cerro (hill):
cero, çero, çerro, cerro. In K’ichee the problems multiply.

* Corrections, side-notes, or added words between lines. Only crossed-out
words and comments that were added in the margins by Father Ximénez
himself have been considered valid for transcription. Marks made with a
black ink, perhaps during the 19th century, have been omitted (see: f. 7r,
24r, 26r, 28r, 32r, 36v ―in this folio only the side note which has been
controversial was added in a footnote– 51v, 52r, 53r, and 54r).

* In folio 54r lines six and seven appear repeated and we have kept the
repetition.

Father Ximénez only numbered the folios until the number 12, and only in the
recto side of the leaf; after this folio the numbers appear written with pencil in a
modern calligraphy. This difference has been indicated in the transcription by use of
a different font. In folio 26r the number 31 appears at the top center. This number
does not match the sequence, thus, it is probably a folio that Ximénez was readying
for use in another document.

Finally, in the present transcription two features have been added. One of them
is the numeration of the lines of the manuscript. These numbers ―referring to folio
and line― allow for easy and unquestionable identification of specific points in the
manuscript. In this way, references based on non-standardized verses or in particular
editions are avoided.

The second innovation is that in some specific cases footnotes comparing
discrepancies or agreements between some of the previous transcriptions have been
added. Obviously, there are many more discrepancies than those that we have
specified, but we want to emphasize that the purpose of these footnotes is only to help
identify some particular variant and not to scrutinize the whole text. The criterion has
been to locate critical points in the manuscript, such as crossed-out words, additions
between lines, or similar elements and compare different readings or versions. The
closest transcriptions to the manuscript are the ones done by Leonhard Schultze
Jena, Adrián Inés Chávez, and Allen Christenson. For the present transcription we
also consulted other copies that are mentioned below. For future translators we
strongly recommend looking at all of these other transcriptions. 

Following is the chart with the abbreviations for the references used in the
footnotes, the names and the years of publication:

B.B.: Charles Brasseur de Bourbourg (1861)
S.J.: Leonhard Schulze Jena (1944)
B.-X.: Dora Burgess and Patricio Xec (1955)
A.V.: Antonio Villacorta (1962)
A.I.CH.: Adrián Inés Chávez (1979)
L.-L.: Carlos Rolando de León Valdés and Francisco López Perén (1985)
A. Ch.: Allen Christenson (2004)

Summer 2007 Carlos M. López 